<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>How Europe Underdeveloped Africa</title>
<link href="template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:a9e1223e-ac61-4240-88e1-259182039c2c" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<section class="Front_Page" epub:type="backmatter">
<h2 class="fmtitle1"><a id="page_355"/><a href="05_Contents.xhtml#r29" id="s29">Guide to Further Reading</a></h2>
<p class="h3"><b>Chapter 1.</b></p>
<p class="noindent">There is a great deal of literature on “development” and “underdevelopment,” although less than one would expect in view of the importance of the subjects. Most of that which is available seeks to justify capitalism. Hence, there is a narrow concentration on “economic development,” and particularly on capitalist economies, rather than any analysis of human social development. That approach is challenged by Marxist writers in the metropoles and increasingly by scholars from the underdeveloped world.</p>
<p class="hang1">Frederick Engels, <i>The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State</i>, Chicago; C. H. Kerr and Co., 1902.</p>
<p class="hang">Karl Marx, <i>Preface to a Contribution to a Critique of Political Economy</i>.</p>
<p class="hang">Karl Marx, <i>Pre-Capitalist Economic Foundations</i>, edited by E. J. Hobsbawm. New York: International Publishers, 1965.</p>
<p class="noindent1">These three works are samples of writing by the founders of what is now called Marxism. Most of the publications of Marx and Engels have a relevance to the theme of development, with particular emphasis on feudal and capitalist times.</p>
<p class="hang1"><a id="page_356"/>Richard T. Gill, <i>Economic Development: Past and Present</i>. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall, 1963.</p>
<p class="hang">Ragnar Nurske, <i>Problems of Capital Formation in Underdeveloped Countries</i>. London: Oxford University Press, 1953.</p>
<p class="noindent1">These are typical examples of bourgeois metropolitan views on development and underdevelopment—the first being a text for North American college students by a Canadian economist and the second being a frequently reprinted work of one of the most prominent bourgeois advocates of the “vicious circle of poverty” theory. Unfortunately, these are also examples of the kind of book which dominates the shelves of any university or public library in Africa. The reader is invited to test this generalization.</p>
<p class="hang1">J. D. Bernal, <i>Science in History</i> (4 vol.). Cambridge: MIT Press, 1972.</p>
<p class="hang">Joseph Needham, <i>Science and Civilization in China</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1954.</p>
<p class="noindent1">Both of these are lengthy, but they should be tackled. Science and technology derive from the effort to understand and control the natural environment. Familiarity with the history of science is essential to an awareness of the development of society. Needham’s book is cited here as a corrective to the fairly common view that science is something peculiarly European.</p>
<p class="hang1">Cellso Furtado, <i>Development and Underdevelopment</i>. Berkeley: U. of California Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang">A. Gunder Frank, <i>Capitalism and Underdevelopment in Latin America</i>. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang">Tamas Szentes, <i>The Economy of Underdevelopment</i>. Budapest: Akadémiai Kiadó, 1971.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><a id="page_357"/>The first writer is from Brazil, a country with a long history of dependence on and exploitation by the metropoles of Europe and North America. Frank’s book reflects the thinking of many progressive Latin American intellectuals, and it has now become well-entrenched as a view of Marxists inside the metropoles. Szentes is a Hungarian economist systematically applying Marxist insights to the actual data and processes of the underdeveloped world and imperialism as a whole.</p>
<p class="hang1">Samir Amin, <i>The Class Struggle in Africa</i>. Cambridge, M.A.: Africa Research Group, 1977.</p>
<p class="noindent1">Samir Amin is a North African. He stands out with regard both to the volume of his productions and the quality of his insights. The text cited above is very general—covering in outline the period of the roots of development in ancient Africa right up to the present and the projected socialist future. It is likely that more of his work will be translated into English (French being his working language).</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Chapter 2.</b></p>
<p class="noindent">Studies on early African history are lacking for many reasons, the most obvious being that African history was for a long time considered by the colonialists as having so little value that it was not worth reconstructing. Another decisive factor is that studies of Africa were mainly carried out by European bourgeois anthropologists, whose philosophical outlook on “primitive societies” caused them to separate African society from its historical context. There was a concentration on micro-units and no reference to overall patterns. The new African scholarship has been under way for too short a time to have provided any significant breakthrough. The few books cited below are part of the new approach.</p>
<p class="hang1"><a id="page_358"/>Basil Davidson, <i>Africa in History</i>, New York: Macmillan, 1968.</p>
<p class="hang">Henri Labouret, <i>Africa before the White Men</i>, New York: Walker and Co., 1963.</p>
<p class="hang">Margaret Shinnie, <i>Ancient African Kingdoms</i>, New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1965.</p>
<p class="hang">K. M. Panikkar, <i>The Serpent and the Crescent</i>, New York: Asia Publishing House, 1963.</p>
<p class="noindent1">The above group of books are assessments by non-Africans from a sympathetic perspective and with sufficient value for them to be respected and widely used inside Africa. K. M. Panikkar is an unusual example of an Asian scholar with a professional interest in the African continent.</p>
<p class="hang1">J. Ajayi and I. Espie (editors), <i>A Thousand Years of West African History</i>, New York: Humanities Press, 1969.</p>
<p class="hang">B. A. Ogot and J. A. Kieran (editors), <i>Zamani, a Survey of East African History</i>, New York: Humanities Press, 1968.</p>
<p class="noindent1">African historians have begun to provide syntheses of the continent’s history by putting together relevant collections—usually on some section of the continent, as in the two examples above. Unfortunately, the quality varies from one selection to another, and African writers have not as yet provided any coherent overview of the regions with which they are supposedly dealing.</p>
<p class="hang1">G. J. Afolabi Oj, <i>Yoruba Culture, a Geographical Analysis</i>. London: University of London Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang">B. M. Fagan, <i>Southern Africa during the Iron Age</i>. New York: Praeger, 1965.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><a id="page_359"/>What these two dissimilar books have in common is an awareness of the material environment. Afolabi Ojo is a Nigerian geographer and B. M, Fagan is an English archaeologist.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Chapter 3.</b></p>
<p class="noindent">The subject of Africa’s contribution to European development reveals several of the factors which limit a writer’s representation of reality. Language and nationality, for instance, are effective barriers to communication. Works in English seldom take account of the effect brought about in France, Holland, or Portugal by participation in slaving and other forms of commerce which exploited Africa in the precolonial period. The ideological gulf is responsible for the fact that most bourgeois scholars write about phenomena such as the Industrial Revolution in England without once mentioning the European slave trade as a factor in primary accumulation of capital. Marx himself had laid great emphasis on sources of overseas capital accumulation. But even Marxists (as prominent as Maurice Dobb and E. J. Hobshawm) for many years concentrated on examining the evolution of capitalism out of feudalism inside Europe, with only marginal reference to the massive exploitation of Africans, Asians, and American Indians.</p>
<p class="hang1">Eric Williams, <i>Capitalism and Slavery</i>. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1944.</p>
<p class="hang">Oliver Cox, <i>Capitalism as a System</i>. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1964. Cox, an African American, makes the basic point that capitalism has from very early times been an international system. Eric Williams, a West Indian, is very precise and very detailed in illustrating the connection between British capitalism and the enslavement of Africans.</p>
<p class="hang"><a id="page_360"/>W. E. B. Du Bois, <i>The Suppression of the Atlantic Slave-Trade to the United States of America—1638–1870</i>, New York: Social Science Press, 1954.</p>
<p class="hang">Richard Pares, <i>Yankees and Creoles: the Trade between North America and the West Indies before the American Revolution</i>. London: Longmans Green, 1956.</p>
<p class="noindent1">Both of these provide data on the contribution of African labor to the development of capitalism in the United States. in the epoch of slavery.</p>
<p class="hang1">Leo Huberman, <i>Man’s Worldly Goods: The Story of the Wraith of Nations</i>. New York and London: Harper Bros., 1936.</p>
<p class="hang">F. Clairemonte, Economic Liberalism and Underdevelopment. Huberman’s book is an excellent overall treatment of the development of capitalism out of feudalism in Europe. It includes a section in which the role of slavery is highlighted. Clairemonte’s study accords recognition lo the role played by the subcontinent of India in building Europe.</p>
<p class="hang">Philip D. Curtin, <i>The Image of Africa</i>, Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1964.</p>
<p class="hang">Winthrop Jordan, <i>White Over Black: American Attitudes towards the Negro</i>. Chapel Hill: Published for the Institute of Early American History and Culture at Williamsburg, 1968.</p>
<p class="noindent1">These two texts are relevant to the question of the rise of white racism, although neither of the two makes sufficiently explicit the connection between racism and capitalism.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Chapter 4.</b></p>
<p class="noindent">The section of this chapter dealing with African society is a continuation of <a href="10_Chapter2.xhtml">Chapter 2</a>; and general books cited there are also relevant to this context. More African writers are involved <a id="page_361"/>in this recent pre-colonial period, which is, of course, one aspect of a national struggle. There are also more and better monographs on given areas and subjects. But the coming of imperialism has not yet been seriously pursued from an African viewpoint, and there is a marked absence of theory linking together the numerous facts that are now well established about events taking place in Africa between 1500 and 1885.</p>
<p class="hang1">J. B. Webster and A. A. Boahen, <i>History of West Africa; the Revolutionary Years—1815 to Independence</i>, New York: Praeger, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang">Basil Davidson with J. E. Mhina, <i>History of East and Central Africa to the Late Nineteenth Century</i>. New York: Doubleday Anchor Book A 677.</p>
<p class="noindent1">These two should be added to the list of general texts which provide regional surveys over a long period of time. They have the advantage of being coherent interpretations and not just collected essays.</p>
<p class="hang1">Walter Rodney, <i>West Africa and the Atlantic Slave Trade</i>. Nairobi: Published for the Historical Association of Tanzania by the East African Publishing House, 1969.</p>
<p class="hang">E. Alpers, <i>The East African Slave Trade</i>.</p>
<p class="hang">I. A. Akinjogbin, <i>Dahomey and Its Neighbours</i>. Cambridge; Cambridge University Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="noindent1">The first two are short accounts of the impact of slave exports on the African regions concerned. The third is a detailed account by a Nigerian scholar of Dahomey’s involvement with Europeans.</p>
<p class="hang1">Jacob U. Egharevba, <i>A Short History of Benin</i>, Ibadan; Ibadan University Press, 1968.</p>
<p class="hang">B. A. Ogot, <i>History of the Southern Luo</i>. Nairobi; East Africa Publishing House, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang"><a id="page_362"/>Isaria Kimambo, <i>A Political History of the Pare of Tanzania</i>. New York: International Publications, 1971.</p>
<p class="hang">Jan Vansina, <i>Kingdoms of the Savanna</i>. Madison; University of Wisconsin Press, 1966.</p>
<p class="noindent1">The first three are good examples of scholarship by Africans concerning historical developments starting before contact with Europe. They are characterized by the use of African oral traditions as a basis for interpretation. The fourth (by a European) was a pioneering work which drew heavily on oral traditions in reconstructing Central African history.</p>
<p class="hang1">J. Ade Ajayi, <i>Christian Missions in Nigeria, 1845–1891</i>. New York: International Publications, 1971.</p>
<p class="hang">E. A. Ayandele, <i>The Missionary Impact on Modern Nigeria</i>, New York: Humanities Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="noindent1">One aspect of the imperialist epoch that has been probed by African historians (and many non-Africans) is that of the Christian missionaries, as evidenced by the above works.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Chapter 5.</b></p>
<p class="noindent">Here again, few scholars have treated capitalism and imperialism as an integral system involving the transfer of surplus and other benefits from colonies to metropoles. And where there is an awareness of the unity of the system, no detailed analysis necessarily follows. In effect, one is faced with the limitations of a metropolitan viewpoint. Thus, European or white American Marxists who expose the rapacious nature of modern capitalism within their own countries have not generally integrated this with the exploitation of Africa, Asia, and Latin America—except for the very recent neo-colonial period.</p>
<p class="hang1"><a id="page_363"/>George Padmore, <i>Africa: How Britain Rules Africa</i>. London: Wishart Books Ltd., 1936.</p>
<p class="hang">Kwame Nkrumah, <i>Africa Must Unite</i>. New York: International Publishers, 1970.</p>
<p class="hang">——<i>Neo-colonialism, the Highest Stage of Imperialism</i>.</p>
<p class="hang">W. A. Hunton, <i>Decision in Africa</i>. New York: International Publishers, 1957.</p>
<p class="noindent1">The most vociferous remarks about Africa’s contribution to Europe have been made by politically involved Pan-American intellectuals, such as these three.</p>
<p class="hang1">Grover Clark, <i>The Balance Sheets of Colonialism</i>, New York: Russell and Russell, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang">D. K. Fieldhouse, <i>The Colonial Empires</i>. New York: Delacorte Press, 1966.</p>
<p class="noindent1">These two texts proclaim that colonialism was not essentially economic, and that the colonizers did not gain. The second book is recent, and the view is still very much alive.</p>
<p class="hang1">U.S.S.R. Institute of History, <i>A History of Africa 1918–1967</i>.</p>
<p class="hang">Pierre Jalée, <i>The Pillage of the Third World</i>. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1970.</p>
<p class="noindent1">These (Marxist) texts specifically about Africa and the exploited sector of the capitalist world do make the point that the metropoles were extracting huge colonial surpluses.</p>
<p class="h3"><b>Chapter 6.</b></p>
<p class="noindent">Colonial rule generated a great deal of written material which can serve as one of the bases for historical reconstruction. Even the non-specialist in African history would be well advised to look at some original sources, such as the data compiled by Lord Hailey. Approached with care, several of the anthropological <a id="page_364"/>texts also yield information and insights with regard to detailed changes in African social structures.</p>
<p class="indent">Above all, however, the generations who suffered under colonialism are still living repositories of the continent’s history. The collective knowledge of the African people derived from experience is the most authentic basis of the history of the colonial period. Unfortunately, much of the experience is not yet written down, but glimpses can be got from biographies of prominent Africans such as Nnamdi Azikiwe, Kwame Nkrumah, Oginga Odinga, and Kenneth Kaunda, as well as from the political writings of these and other leaders—notably Mwalimu Nyerere and Sékou Touré. The books by Padmore and Hunton mentioned in the literature for <a href="13_Chapter5.xhtml">Chapter 5</a> are even more relevant in this context.</p>
<p class="hang1">Jack Woddis, <i>Africa, the Roots of Revolt</i>. London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1961.</p>
<p class="hang">——<i>Africa, the Lion Awakes</i>.</p>
<p class="hang">Gann, L. H., Duignan, Peter, <i>The Burden of Empire</i>. New York: Praeger, 1967.</p>
<p class="noindent1">The first author and his works are well known for supporting the African anti-colonial stand. The second example is a colonialist interpretation which offers a contrast.</p>
<p class="hang1">Abdou Moumouni, <i>Education in Africa</i>. New York: Praeger, 1968.</p>
<p class="hang">Sloan and Kitchen, <i>The Educated African</i>.</p>
<p class="noindent1">For data, the second book is useful. From the viewpoint of analysis, Moumouni’s book is superb.</p>
<p class="hang1">Frantz Fanon, <i>Black Skins, White Masks</i>. New York: Grove Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="hang">——<i>The Wretched of the Earth</i>. New York: Grove Press, 1963.</p>
<p class="hang">——<i>Towards the African Revolution</i>. New York: Monthly Review Press, 1967.</p>
<p class="noindent1"><a id="page_365"/>These studies are unique in revealing the psychological aspects of enslavement and colonization as far as Africans are concerned, whether in the Americas or on the African continent. Fanon does not have any equal in analyzing the last stages of African colonialism and the advent of neo-colonialism.<a id="page_366"/></p>
</section>
</body>
</html>