<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" xml:lang="en-US">
<head>
<meta content="text/html; charset=utf-8" http-equiv="default-style"/>
<title>How Europe Underdeveloped Africa</title>
<link href="template.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:a9e1223e-ac61-4240-88e1-259182039c2c" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
</head>
<body epub:type="backmatter">
<section class="Chapter" epub:type="backmatter">
<h2 class="bmtitlea"><a id="page_398"/><b>KEY ROLES and ACTIVITIES of<br/>THE WALTER RODNEY FOUNDATION</b></h2>
<p class="bmnoindent1a"><span class="underline">Walter Rodney Papers</span>: In 2003, the Walter Rodney Papers were donated by the Rodney family to the Atlanta University Center Robert W. Woodruff Library (AUC RWWL) in Atlanta, Georgia. The Collection is the largest and most comprehensive collection of writings, speeches, correspondence, photographs and documents created by or about Walter Rodney anywhere in the world and are available for viewing and research. Travel Awards are available. Contact 404.978.2052 or <a href="mailto:archives@auctr.edu">archives@auctr.edu</a>.</p>
<p class="bmnoindent1a"><span class="underline">Publications</span>: Rodney authored more than ten books and fifty articles, including <i>How Europe Underdeveloped Africa</i> and <i>A History of the Upper Guinea Coast</i>. An up-to-date bibliography of all books, papers, journals and articles written by and about Walter Rodney is maintained. The Foundation also publishes the peer-reviewed journal, <i>Groundings: Development, Pan-Africanism and Critical Theory</i>.</p>
<p class="bmnoindent1a"><span class="underline">Walter Rodney Legacy Projects</span>: Ongoing worldwide outreach to collect, record and preserve oral history, information and memories about Dr. Walter Rodney. All materials will become a part of the Walter Rodney Collection at the AUC RWWL.</p>
<p class="bmnoindent1a"><span class="underline">Walter Rodney Symposium</span>: Since 2004, an annual symposium is held in Atlanta, Georgia, during the week of Walter Rodney’s birthday (23 March). The goal is to bring together scholars, researchers, activists, students and the community to discuss contemporary issues from a Rodney perspective and how Rodney’s methodology remains relevant today.</p>
<p class="bmnoindent1a"><span class="underline">Walter Rodney Speaker Series</span>: An annual spring lecture series started in 2013, based on the life and legacy of Dr. Walter Rodney. In collaboration with Atlanta area colleges and universities, undergraduate and graduate students can register for the course component and receive credit towards their degrees.</p>
</section>
</body>
</html>